
How to Use through Examples (Tensorflow Backend) 
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The file *RUN\_mdgru.py* is used for
basically all segmentation tasks. For now, please refer to it's help
message by calling *python3 RUN\_mdgru.py* and the documentation in the
code.

As the RUN\_mdgru.py file contains a overly large number of parameters,
a sample train+test, individual train, and individual test run are
detailed in the following:

First, the data have to be prepared and have to have a certain format:
Each sample should be contained in one folder, with the label and
feature (e.g. different Sequences) files consistently named after a
certain scheme. Furthermore, all the samples belonging to test, train
and validation set should be located in respective folders. The
following shows an example, where we have training, testing and
validation folders train\_data, test\_data and val\_data respectively,
containing each some samples. Each sample consists of two featurefiles
(seq1.nii.gz and seq2.nii.gz) and one labelfile (lab.nii.gz), as shown
in the following example:

::

    path/to/samplestructure
    ├── test_data
    │   ├── SAMPLE_27535
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   └── SAMPLE_6971
    │       ├── lab.nii.gz
    │       ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │       └── seq2.nii.gz
    ├── train_data
    │   ├── SAMPLE_11571
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   ├── SAMPLE_13289
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   ├── SAMPLE_16158
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   ├── SAMPLE_18429
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   ├── SAMPLE_19438
    │   │   ├── lab.nii.gz
    │   │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │   │   └── seq2.nii.gz
    │   └── SAMPLE_2458
    │       ├── lab.nii.gz
    │       ├── seq1.nii.gz
    │       └── seq2.nii.gz
    └── val_data
        ├── SAMPLE_26639
        │   ├── lab.nii.gz
        │   ├── seq1.nii.gz
        │   └── seq2.nii.gz
        └── SAMPLE_27319
            ├── lab.nii.gz
            ├── seq1.nii.gz
            └── seq2.nii.gz

The Labelfiles need to be consistent with increasing class numbers. Eg.
if we model the background, white matter, gray matter and csf for
instance, we have 4 classes and hence distribute them to the numbers 0,
1, 2 and 3. Furthermore, the labelfiles should also be encoded as
integer files (e.g. nifti uint8), and the feature and label files need
to have matching dimensions.

Train + Test
------------

In the following, we show the case, where we train a model on the above
data and also immediately evaluate our model on the last training state
(rarely a good idea in general) to explain the individual parameters:

::

    python3 RUN_mdgru.py --datapath path/to/samplestructure --locationtraining train_data \
    --locationvalidation val_data --locationtesting test_data \
    --optionname defaultsettings --modelname mdgrudef48 -w 64 64 64 -p 5 5 5 \
    -f seq1.nii.gz seq2.nii.gz -m lab.nii.gz --iterations 100000 \
    --nclasses 4 --ignore_nifti_header --num_threads 4

The above first four parameters tell the script, where our different
data lie. Furthermore, it will create a folder experiments in
"path/to/samplestructure". Inside this experiments folder, a folder for
the current setting is created. The name of this folder can be
determined with "--optionname". For each individual
train/test/train+test run, a folder with logging data is created using
the latest timestamp in seconds inside this settings folder. Any log
data for the experiment can then in turn be found inside the cache
subfolder. (e.g.
/path/to/samplestructure/defaultsettings/1524126169/cache). Inside this
cache folder, there will be a log file, logging all relevant information
to the current run, all validation files will be saved here as well as
the checkpoints and tensorboard data.

Expecially for 2d data, and if a large number of samples is available,
the whole image can be processed. There, we set the subvolume
(patchsize) parameter to the size of the images, and the padding
parameters to 0. This has the effect, that we only sample inside the
image, with a padding of 0 and hence just take the full image. As
current hardware can rarely support the full volume for volumetric data
though, a subvolume needs to be specified. Imagine we are using
volumetric data with dimensions 256x256x192. Since this will not fit, we
decide to sample patches of 64^3, and hence set the subvolume parameter
-w to 64 64 64. Furthermore, we decide that we do want to sample a bit
outside of the full volume as well, as interesting data is close to the
border. we hence set the -p parameter to 5 5 5, allowing for a random
sampling of patches of 5 voxels outside along each axis of the full
volume. During testing, patches are sampled from a regular grid to fully
cover the full volume (or image). There, the p parameter is used to also
specify the amount of overlap of the patches. In our example, we would
only specify an overlap of 5 voxels along each dimension.

The following image shows the influence of the w and p parameters when
sampling images during the training and testing phase:

.. figure:: https://github.com/zubata88/mdgru/blob/master/sampling.png?raw=true
   :alt: Sampling subvolumes/patches

   Sampling subvolumes/patches

The remaining options given above are the --modelname, which is a
optional, userspecified name for the model we are creating in the
tensorflow graph. -f and -m specify feature and mask files to be used.
--nclasses specifies how many classes are in the label files (e.g. 4 for
background, white matter, grey matter and csf). --iterations specifies
the maximum number of iterations to train. If we cancel the training
process at any time, the current state is saved in a checkpoint called
*interrupt*. Finally, --ignore\_nifti\_header is required due to a bug
in the nifti reorientation code and num\_threads is a parameter which
defines how many threads should be used to load data concurrently. This
can initially be set to a low value such as 4. If during training, in
the log file or stdout on the console, values larger than 0.1 seconds
are used for "io", it might be advisable to increase this value, as
valuable time is wasted on waiting for the data loading routine.

Only Train
----------

Usually, we want to use the validation set to determine, which state of
the network works best for our data and then evaluate our testset on
that data. We can do this by using the following command:

::

    python3 RUN_mdgru.py --datapath path/to/samplestructure --locationtraining train_data \
    --locationvalidation val_data \
    --optionname onlytrainrun --modelname mdgrudef48 -w 64 64 64 -p 5 5 5 \
    -f seq1.nii.gz seq2.nii.gz -m lab.nii.gz --iterations 100000 \
    --nclasses 4 --ignore_nifti_header --num_threads 4 --onlytrain

In this setup, we can omit the '--locationtesting' and append
'--onlytrain' in its place, to specify, that we want to stop the
procedure after the training process.

Furthermore, it is in most cases advisable to use a certain amount of
data augmentation, since rarely enough labelled training data is
available. For this, the following set of parameters can be optionally
added for the training procedure:

::

    --rotate ANGLE --scale scale1 scale2... --deformation gridspacing1 gridspacing2... --deformSigma samplingstdev1 samplingstdev2...

The first parameter is a scalar in radians which allows for random
rotation around a random vector for 3d data, and around the center point
for 2d data between [-ANGLE,+ANGLE] degrees. The parameter is sampled
uniformly. The scaling parameter allows for random scaling between
[1/scale,scale], where we sample form an exponential distribution and
each axis has its own scaling parameter. The last two parameters have to
be used together and specify a random deformation grid which is applied
to the subvolumes. The first parameters specify the grid spacing, and
the second set of parameters the standard deviation of a zero mean
Gaussian which is used at each grid point to sample a random vector.
This low resolution grid is then interpolated quadratically and used to
deform the sampling of the subvolumes or patches. 

Only Test
---------

::

    python3 RUN_mdgru.py --datapath path/to/samplestructure --locationtraining train_data \
    --locationtesting test_data\
    --optionname defaultsettings --modelname mdgrudef48 -w 64 64 64 -p 5 5 5 \
    -f seq1.nii.gz seq2.nii.gz -m lab.nii.gz \
    --nclasses 4 --ignore_nifti_header --onlytest --ckpt path/to/samplestructure/experiments/onlytrainrun/1524126169/cache/temp-22500 --notestingmask

Usually, after conducting a training run, it is the best idea to simply
copy the training parameters, remove the "onlytest", add the
locationtesting and the checkpointfile with "--ckpt". Some other
parameters can also be left out as shown above, since they do not have
an impact on the testing process. The training process before, when
completed, creates at the specified saving interval checkpoint files,
which are named temp-\$i, where \$i is the iteration number, if no epochs 
are specified or temp-epoch\$epoch-\$i otherwise. On the file system, the 
files also have appendices like ".data-00000-of-00001" or ".meta" or 
".index", but these can be ignored and should not be specified when 
specifying a checkpoint. After the whole training procedure, a *final* 
checkpoint is created, which saves the final state of the network. 
If the training process is interrupted, a "interrupt-\$i"
checkpoint is created, where $i is again the iteration number. All of
these three types of checkpoints can be used to evaluate the model.
During testing, the optionname also defines the name of the probability
maps that are saved in the test\_data sample folders as results. If
multiple checkpoints are used for evaluation, either none, one or the
same number of optionnames can be provided. Finally, --notestingmask has
to be used, if for the testing samples, no mask files are available.
Otherwise, it will not find testing samples, as it uses the mask file as
a requirement for each folder to be accepted as valid sample. If there
are labelmaps for the test samples, this flag can be omitted, leading to
an automatic evaluation using predefined metrics during the evaluation.

Localization code
-----------------

The code for the landmark localization task is also included in this
release except for an appropriate *RUN*-file. Since it would need some
code updates due to recent changes in the code, it has not been
included. If you're anyhow interested in the localization code, please
get in touch, and I could provide you with the (now outdated)
*RUN*-files we used and information on what needs to be updated to make
it work again. 

